---
layout: post
title: Why to code in ruby?
author: Hector Bustillos
email: hector.bustillos@crowdint.com
avatar: fa56812143dd6049ef19d1a8032f21da
---

We have been seeing a lot of post about different stuff about rails
 and ruby, benchmarks, ways to develop ,implementations and more. 
 But if you are a n00b in the ruby world or if you are thinking in
 change to ruby, but you are not sure, I am about to trying to
 give some answer for that common question that you may have. 
 
Like php vs Ruby? or thoose sorts of things..

## php, .net, flex or ruby??

### php advantage

Well php is one of the most common and widely used language for
coding dynamic webpages.You can write code inserted directly in HTML,
 it's secure, stable an dopen source. stable and open source.

I have to said that it is easy to use, I've started to write webpages in
php and it was easy to understand 'cause, at time Ive already knew C and php is 
C based. It runs in almost all systems(UNIX, windows and MAC OSX). 
Start using it is as simple as install Apache and add php module.

Php has a wide community and a lot of usefull libraries. A lot
of books and php.net is awesome.

### php disadvantages

First of all, not everything in php is a piece of cake, when I was coding
in it, I got some issues when I try to do some more "complex" things, like 
make a file upload feature and something like that.
<br/>
Php is not a 100% Object oriented, it's trying to implement in the newest 
version, but is not good enough as others.

The error handling is very poor in php.<br/>
Sometimes, you will get messy code beacuse the lack of good practices.<br/>
You have to take care of some security flaws.<br/>

### .net framework advantages

I really dont like to talk about, but, I have to say that it's easy
and it have a complete documentation, it's a event language, so it is easy for
n00b developers.
C# is powerfull, binding and a couple of more features.

### .net framework disadvantages

With this framework you have to work in windows and within this enviroment, you will
get a lot of issues trying to connect other DB rather than SQL Server. And It is heavy as
hell.
Also you have to pay for everything.


### Flex advantages
 I really dont know much about it, so I ask to a friend of mine *chicken*(Adrian Castillo).
He told me that, Flex had a lot of good point, like:<br/>
Cross-browser.<br/>
Multiplatform.<br/>
Multimedia content.<br/>
Authorship, you can create digital signs for you projects.<br/>
And it is extendible.<br/>
 
 
### Flex disadvantages

The bad things about Flex are:
when you create a project you have to choose a flash version, and you will have to use that version only.
If you want the edge stuff, It will be not avialable for everyone.
theres not to much docs and examples.<br/>
It's a event language, so if you are not carefull, you will get a mess.


### Ruby advantages

Well, I am new in ruby too, I have like ~9 months using it, I think, and I have to say that
it has been amazing time. Everything is so easy, you dont have to worry in write
common methods, you have to worry in solve the problem that you have, not in trivial
stuff. <br/>
The guy who wrote it [*Yukihiro Matsumoto*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yukihiro_Matsumoto) wants to have simple code 
not so complex, something with the developers feel free and happy.

It's so quickly to learn, just a take a look at the documentation and thats all.

In ruby everything is an object, an example.
{% highlight ruby %}

10.times {puts "hello world"}

{% endhighlight %}
Take a look at the code and you will see that "10" is object with the method "times", 
and will put on the screen hello world 10 times, just like that. That's simple, huh?.

Other thing is that ruby have an excellent error handler.

The community is huge now, and you have a lot of gems and plugins to help in your
projects.

Ruby is develop in GNU/linux, but you can work with it
 in windows,mac or other systems.
 
When we are talking of ruby and php, we have to talk about [*Ruby on Rails*](http://rubyonrails.org) an
awesome framework for ruby, there are other out there(like sinatra), but
right now is the one I like the most.

Soo What can I say about it?. Well you can create a web site in minutes
I really meant that, with the *scaffold* function you will have a template 
in a second(not recommended for important projects).
Theres a lot of cool functions, like time methods:
{% highlight ruby %}

Time.now
 #2010-12-19 23:55:57 -0600
Time.now + 1.day
 #2010-12-20 23:56:06 -0600
2.day.ago
 #Sat, 18 Dec 2010 05:57:15 UTC +00:00

{% endhighlight %}
It's a simple stuff but so usefull.

In ruby on rails, you will write a lot less code,
 easy configuration, it has an integrated testing framework.
 
And more and more and more.....

### Ruby disadvantages

Like all the languages it has disadvantages, not everything is beatiful.
 Ok now a couple of them:<br/>
 
The documentation is mostly complete, but it doesnt have method examples or stuff
like php.net<br/>

If you dont have the money to pay the hosting it will be difficult to get your app
online, theres a solution [*heroku*](http://www.heroku.com) it's a free web  hosting, but just for startups.
So I have to say that it's expensive to go live.

Another thing is when ruby sites grow they will need a
robust infraestructure, it's heavy.


## My coworkers opinion
I've asked to some of my co-workers about the things that they like about ruby,
and the things that not. And I got the next anwsers about they likes:

They love the way you can changes everything, like open the methods and rewrite
them.<br/>
They said that everything is so easy to do, the sintax, write methods, the blocks,
etc.<br/>
Also, it's amazing how everything is an object so, you can create methods for
that object, and access them so quickly.<br/>
It's so easy to learn.

On the other hand, I ask about the things that they doent like about it.

It's not multithread.multitask<br/>
It's so easy that sometimes it convert you on a lazzy dev.<br/>
It's perfect. I know i now Im just telling you what they said.<br/>
It's heavier than php.<br/>


## Final thoughts
This are a couple of things, just for make an idea. If you dig more I am sure,
that you will find more things, good and bad ones, and it's the same in every
language, you have to try it by yourself and see what can you do with ruby.

If you have another question or if you want to say that this post it's pure
crap, dont hesitate on tell. 

I hope this help you a little bit to take a step into ruby or maybe to keep 
outside of it.







